Documentation for Federated (OIDC) Keystone adoption (#1062)
openstack-k8s-operators/data-plane-adoption: docs_user/modules/proc_configuring-federation-for-keystone.adoc

_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id='configuring-federation-for-keystone_{context}']

= Configuring OIDC federation for the Identity service

To let {identity_service_first_ref} trust an external OpenID Connect (OIDC) identity provider, apply the federation configuration and verify that federated users can authenticate.

.Prerequisites

* You have Keycloak reachable from your {rhos_long} cluster.
* You have access to the Keycloak `keycloak-ca.crt` file that corresponds to its certificate chain.

.Procedure

. Create the `keycloakca` secret so that the {identity_service} pods trust the Keycloak certificate authority (CA):
+
----
$ oc create secret generic keycloakca \
    --from-file=KeyCloakCA=keycloak-ca.crt -n openstack
----
+
* Replace `keycloak-ca.crt` with the path to the CA file you want to use.

> . Create the `keystone-httpd-override` secret that provides the Apache HTTPD overrides required for OIDC:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create the `keystone-httpd-override` secret that provides the Apache HTTPD overrides that are required for OIDC:
```

    OIDCClaimDelimiter ","
    OIDCPassUserInfoAs "payload"
    OIDCPassClaimsAs "both"
    OIDCProviderMetadataURL "https://keycloak-openstack.apps-crc.testing/auth/realms/openstack/.well-known/openid-configuration"
    OIDCClientID "rhoso"
    OIDCClientSecret "<client_secret>"
    OIDCCryptoPassphrase "<crypto_passphrase>"
    OIDCOAuthClientID "rhoso"
    OIDCOAuthClientSecret "<client_secret>"
    OIDCOAuthIntrospectionEndpoint "https://keycloak-openstack.apps-crc.testing/auth/realms/openstack/protocol/openid-connect/token/introspect"
    OIDCRedirectURI "https://keystone-public-openstack.apps-crc.testing/v3/auth/OS-FEDERATION/identity_providers/kcIDP/protocols/openid/websso/"
    LogLevel debug

    <LocationMatch "/v3/auth/OS-FEDERATION/identity_providers/kcIDP/protocols/openid/websso">
      AuthType "openid-connect"
      Require valid-user
    </LocationMatch>

    <Location "/v3/OS-FEDERATION/identity_providers/kcIDP/protocols/openid/auth">
      AuthType oauth20
      Require valid-user
    </Location>

    <LocationMatch "/v3/auth/OS-FEDERATION/websso/openid">
      AuthType "openid-connect"
      Require valid-user
    </LocationMatch>
----
+

> * Replace the placeholder values, such as `<client_secret>` and `<crypto_passphrase>`, with the credentials that match your Keycloak deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
where:

`<client_secret>`:: Replace with your client ID to use for the OIDC provider handshake. You must get this from your SSO administrator.
`<crypto_passphrase>`:: Replace with the client secret to use for the OIDC provider handshake. You must get this from your SSO administrator after providing your redirect URLs.
`<LocationMatch>` and `<Location>`:: Replace with the chosen string that creates your unique redirect URL.
```
@xek I got these descriptions from the following guide. Please confirm that they are relevant for this step.
https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openstack_services_on_openshift/18.0/html/configuring_security_services/assembly_rhoso-federation#proc_deploying-rhoso-with-a-federated-idp_rhoso-federation

. Patch the `OpenStackControlPlane` custom resource (CR) to enable OIDC federation for Keystone:
+
[source,yaml]
----
spec:
  tls:
    caBundleSecretName: keycloakca
  keystone:
    template:
      customServiceConfig: |
        [token]
        expiration = 360000
        [federation]
        trusted_dashboard=https://horizon-openstack.apps-crc.testing/dashboard/auth/websso/
        sso_callback_template=/etc/keystone/sso_callback_template.html
        [openid]
        remote_id_attribute=HTTP_OIDC_ISS
        [auth]
        methods = password,token,oauth1,mapped,application_credential,openid
        [trusted_ip]
        trusted_forwarded_for_header=True
      httpdCustomization:
        customConfigSecret: keystone-httpd-override
----
+

> * Ensure you merge the patch with any existing custom configuration for the {identity_service}.

Reviewer 2: Yes, this patch is to update their keystone configuration, it'll just add this new configuration for OIDC.

.Verification

. Request a federated token before adoption:
+
----
$ openstack token issue
----
+
This command should return an access token issued for the federated user.

. Verify the token against the newly adopted {identity_service} instance:
+
----
$ oc exec -t openstackclient -- env -u OS_CLOUD - \
    OS_AUTH_URL=https://keystone-public-openstack.apps-crc.testing/v3 \
    OS_AUTH_TYPE=v3oidcaccesstoken \
    OS_ACCESS_TOKEN=$(openstack token issue -f value -c id) \
    openstack project show <project id>
----

> +

Reviewer 2: That's right, this is to test the new token, the user should use a project they have access to for it to work.

> A successful response confirms that the federated OIDC configuration is active on the podified Keystone deployment.

Reviewer 2: It depends on the user's environment, in this example, the response should be the details of the project, it'll change for each project.
